Abbasi & Chen/A Design Framework & System for Text Analysis of CMC

SPECIAL ISSUE

CYBERGATE: A DESIGN FRAMEWORK AND SYSTEM
FOR TEXT ANALYSIS OF COMPUTER-MEDIATED COMMUNICATION1

By: Ahmed Abbasi Sheldon B. Lubar School of Business University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee Milwaukee, WI 53217 U.S.A. abbasi@uwm.edu
Hsinchun Chen Management Information Systems Eller College of Management University of Arizona Tucson, AZ 85721 U.S.A. hchen@eller.arizona.edu
Abstract
Content analysis of computer-mediated communication (CMC) is important for evaluating the effectiveness of electronic communication in various organizational settings. CMC text analysis relies on systems capable of providing suitable navigation and knowledge discovery functionalities. However, existing CMC systems focus on structural features, with little support for features derived from message text. This deficiency is attributable to the informational richness and representational complexities associated with CMC text. In order to address this shortcoming, we propose a design
Note: The figures in this paper are available in color on the MIS Quarterly website at http://www.misq.org/archivist/vol/no32/issue4/AbbasiFigures.pdf. framework for CMC text analysis systems. Grounded in systemic functional linguistic theory, the proposed framework advocates the development of systems capable of representing the rich array of information types inherent in CMC text. It also provides guidelines regarding the choice of features, feature selection, and visualization techniques that CMC text analysis systems should employ. The CyberGate system was developed as an instantiation of the design framework. CyberGate incorporates a rich feature set and complementary feature selection and visualization methods, including the writeprints and ink blots techniques. An application example was used to illustrate the system’s ability to discern important patterns in CMC text. Furthermore, results from numerous experiments conducted in comparison with benchmark methods confirmed the viability of CyberGate’s features and techniques. The results revealed that the CyberGate system and its underlying design framework can dramatically improve CMC text analysis capabilities over those provided by existing systems.
Keywords: Computer-mediated communication, design framework, text analysis systems, design science, information visualization
Introduction
Computer-mediated communication (CMC) has seen tremendous growth due to the fast propagation of the Internet. Text-based modes of CMC include e-mail, listservs, forums, chat, and the World Wide Web (Herring, 2002). These CMC modes have redefined the fabric of organizational culture and interaction. With the persistent evolution of communication processes and constant advancements in technology, such metamorphoses are likely to continue. An important trend has been the increased use of online communities: communities interacting virtually via CMC (Cothrel 2000). Online communities provide invaluable support for various business operations including organizational communication, knowledge dissemination, transfer of goods and services, and product reviews (Cothrel 2000). Electronic communities (Wenger and Snyder 2000) and networks of practice (Wasko and Faraj 2005) enable companies to tap into the wealth of information and expertise available across corporate lines. Virtual teams and group support systems facilitate organizational operations regardless of physical boundaries (Fjermestad and Hiltz 1999; Montoya-Weiss et al. 2001). Internet marketplaces allow the efficient transfer of goods and services and offer a medium for consumer feedback equally useful to potential customers and marketing departments (Turney and Littman 2003).
In spite of the numerous benefits of CMC, it is not without its pitfalls. Two characteristics have proven to be particularly problematic: the lack of control on information quality and the enormity and complexity of data present in CMC. Newsgroups and knowledge exchange communities suffer from lurkers and agitators that decrease the signal to noise ratio in CMC, casting doubts onto the reliability of information exchanged (Wasko and Faraj 2005; Viegas and Smith 2004). Additionally, online communities encompass very large scale conversations involving thousands of users (Herring 2002; Sack 2000). The enormous information quantities make such places difficult to navigate and analyze (Viegas and Smith 2004).
CMC text analysis is the analysis of text-based modes of CMC. There is a need for analysis techniques that can evaluate, summarize, and present CMC text. Systems capable of navigation and knowledge discovery can enhance information transparency (Sack 2000; Wellman 2001). Tools supporting social translucence via the measurement of social accounting data in CMC may improve information quality and analysis capabilities, a condition mutually beneficial to online community members and researchers/analysts (Erickson and Kellogg 2000; Smith 2002). Consequently, numerous CMC systems have been developed to address these needs (Fiore and Smith 2002; Viegas and Smith 2004; Xiong and Donath 1999). These systems generally visualize data provided in the message headers, such as interaction (send/reply structure) and activity (posting patterns) based information. Little support is provided for analysis of information contained in the message body text. In the instances where text analysis is provided, simple feature representations such as those used in information retrieval systems are utilized (Mladenic 1999; Sack 2000).

CMC text is rich in social cues including emotions, opinions, style, and genres (Hara et al. 2000; Henri 1992; Yates and Orlikowski 2002). Improved CMC text analysis capabilities based on richer text representations are necessary (Paccagnella 1997). CMC analysis systems often neglect message text due to representational and presentation complexities. Thus, design guidelines for CMC systems supporting text analysis are needed (Sack 2000). Using Walls et al.’s (1992) model, this paper proposes a design framework for CMC text analysis systems. Grounded in system functional linguistic theory, the framework calls for the development of systems that support various information types found in CMC text. Based upon it, we developed the CyberGate system. Cyber Gate incorporates various features, feature selection, and visualization techniques, including the writeprints and ink blots techniques.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We first highlight the unique characteristics of text-based CMC and provide a review of systems developed to support CMC text analysis. We then describe challenges associated with CMC text and present an overview of our design framework. Subsequent sections elaborate on the components of the design framework. A description of the CyberGate system (developed as an instantiation of our framework) is then offered. The two ensuing sections provide application examples and experimental evaluations of the CyberGate system and its underlying framework. We conclude with a summary of our research contributions and potential future directions.
Background
Many studies have expounded upon the significance of CMC text analysis for analyzing organizations (Chia 2000). Online discourse via computer mediation has resulted in new forms of communicative practice worthy of in-depth analysis (Wilson and Peterson 2002). CMC text analysis is important for evaluating the effectiveness and efficiency of electronic communication in various organizational settings, including virtual teams and group support systems. Analysis of CMC text also plays a crucial role in facilitating the measurement of return on investment for various online communities including electronic communities and networks of practice. CMC and other Internet related technologies are not a source of business value by themselves. They require the utilization of ancillary IT resources (Barua et al. 2004). Paccagnella (1997) emphasized the need for such systems supporting CMC analysis (pp. 4-5), stating that deep, interpretative research on virtual communities could be greatly helped by an accurate use of new

analytic, powerful yet flexible tools, exploiting the possibility of cheaply collecting, organizing and exploring digital data.
In the remainder of this section, we describe the unique characteristics of CMC text that differentiate it from other text documents. We also review prior CMC systems and emphasize the need for ones supporting enhanced text analysis.
CMC Text
Computer-mediated communication text has several unique characteristics that differentiate it from non-CMC documents (e.g., essays, reports, news articles, resumes, research papers). Three of these distinct properties are described here.
(1) The communicative nature of CMC text makes it rich in interaction (Sack 2000), while non-CMC documents are generally devoid of interaction information. Asynchronous and synchronous forms of CMC both contain high levels of interaction, with the specific discourse patterns and dynamics varying depending on the communication context and CMC mode (Fu et al. 2008; Herring 2002).
(2) CMC text also differs from non-CMC documents with respect to its informational composition. While nonCMC documents have a high concentration of topical information (Mladenic 1999), such information is less pervasive in CMC. Nigam and Hurst (2004) analyzed thousands of messages posted on USENET (a large collection of newsgroups), and found that only 3 percent of sentences contained topical information. In contrast, web discourse is rich in opinion and emotion related information (Nigam and Hurst 2004; Subasic and Huettner 2001).
(3) CMC text and non-CMC documents also differ linguistically, with new CMC technologies bringing about the emergence of novel language varieties (Wilson and Peterson 2002). CMC text encompasses a large spectrum of stylistic, genre-based, and idiosyncratic language usage attributable to age, gender, educational, cultural, and contextual differences (Herring 2002; Sack 2000).
CMC Text Analysis Features
The richness of CMC has brought about the emergence of many types of CMC text analysis. These include analysis of participation levels, interaction, social cues, topics, user roles, linguistic variation, types of questions posed, and response complexity (Hara et al. 2000; Henri 1992). The features (i.e., attributes) utilized for CMC text analysis can be broadly categorized as either structural or text-based.
Structural features are attributes based on communication topology. These features are extracted solely from message headers, without any use of information contained in the message body (Sack 2000). Structural features support activity and interaction analysis. Posting activity related features include number of posts, number of initial messages, number of replies, and number of responses to a particular author’s posts (Fiore and Smith 2002). These features can be used to represent an authors’ social accounting metrics (Smith 2002). Analysis of activity based attributes also provides insight into different roles played by online community members, such as debaters, experts, and disseminators (Viegas and Smith 2004; Zhu and Chen 2002). Features used for interaction analysis include the frequency of incoming and outgoing messages. These features are used as input for the construction of social networks based on who is talking to whom (Sack 2000; Smith and Fiore 2001).
Text features are attributes derived from the message body. Although the informational richness of CMC text was previously questioned (Daft and Lengel 1986), numerous studies have since demonstrated the opulence of CMC text (Lee 1994; Yates and Orlikowski 2002). In addition to topical information, CMC text is rich in social cues (Henri 1992), power cues (Panteli 2002), and genres (Yates and Orlikowski 2002). Social cues are elements not related to formal content or subject matter (Henri 1992). Examples include self-introductions, expressions of feelings, greetings, signatures, jokes, use of symbolic icons, and compliments (Hara et al. 2000). CMC text also contains evidence of power cues; stylistic indicators of one’s position/ rank within an organization or online community (Panteli 2002). Genres are types of writing based on purpose and form (e.g., memos, meetings, reports, etc.). Highly prevalent in CMC, they serve as sources of organizing structures and communicative norms (Yates and Orlikowski 2002).
Inclusion of structural and text-based features is critical for CMC text analysis. For instance, online community sustainability analysis requires the use of communication activity, interaction, and text content attributes (Butler 2001). Similarly, Cothrel (2000) incorporated structural features (activity measures) and text features (discussion topics) into his model for measuring an online community’s return on investment. He noted that activity measures describe the general health of a community while discussion topic metrics “assess the ongoing insights that the community offers into the business’s products or processes” (p. 19).

Table 1. Previous CMC Systems

System Name Chat Circles Loom People Garden Babble Conversation Map NetScan Coterie Newsgroup Treemaps Communication Garden PostHistory Social Network Fragments Authorlines Newsgroup Crowds

Reference Donath et al. 1999 Donath et al. 1999 Xiong and Donath 1999 Erickson and Kellogg 2000 Sack 2000 Smith and Fiore 2001 Donath 2002 Fiore and Smith 2002 Zhu and Chen 2002 Viegas et al. 2004 Viegas et al. 2004 Viegas and Smith 2004 Viegas and Smith 2004

Feature Types
Structural Text-based %% %% % % %% % % % %% % % % %

Feature Descriptions length, headers terms, punc., headers headers headers semantic, headers headers headers headers noun phrases, headers headers headers headers headers

CMC Text Analysis Systems
CMC systems can be sorted into two categories based on functionality: those that support the communication process and those that support analysis of communication content (Sack 2000). While it is certainly possible for a single system to support both functions (e.g., Erickson and Kellogg 2000), we focus only on the analysis functionalities provided by these systems due to their relevance to CMC text analysis. Table 1 provides a review of prior CMC systems supporting analysis of text-based CMC. The review is based on the analysis features incorporated by these systems.
A plethora of CMC systems have been developed to support structural features. Several tools visualize posting activity patterns, such as Loom (Donath et al. 1999) and Authorlines (Viegas and Smith 2004). PeopleGarden and Communication Garden both use garden metaphors with flower glyphs to display author and thread activity (Xiong and Donath 1999; Zhu and Chen 2002). The number of petals and thorns, petal colors, and stem lengths are used to represent activity features such as the total number of posts and number of threads in which an author has participated. Babble (Erickson and Kellogg 2000) and Coterie (Donath 2002) are both geared toward showing activity patterns in persistent conversation. In these systems, all participants are displayed in a twodimensional space. More active authors are shown in the center while participants with fewer postings gradually shift to the perimeter. The visual effect is a good method for identifying active participants versus lurkers (Donath 2002). Systems displaying interaction information also exist. Conversation Map visualizes social networks based on send/ reply patterns (Sack 2000). NetScan displays message and author interactions (Smith and Fiore 2001), while Loom shows thread-level interaction structures (Donath et al. 1999).
Previous CMC systems offer limited support for text-based features. Loom shows some content patterns based on message moods. Moods are assigned by taking into consideration the occurrence of certain terms and punctuation in the message text. Chat Circles displays messages based on body text length. Conversation Map and Communication Garden provide more in-depth topical analysis. Conversation Map uses computational linguistics to build semantic networks for discussion topics while Communication Garden performs topic categorization using noun phrases.
Text systems are a related class of systems that are used for either information retrieval (IR systems) or general text categorization and analysis (text mining systems). However, IR systems are more concerned with information access than analysis (Hearst 1999). Mladenic (1999) presented a review of 29 IR systems, all of which used bag-of-words to represent text document topics. Similarly, Tan (1999) reviewed 11 commercial text mining systems and found IBM’s Intelligent Miner to be the most comprehensive. However, this system also utilizes limited feature representations (i.e., bag-ofwords, named entities) and only performs topic categorization and analysis (Dorre et al. 1999).
Overall, the features used in existing CMC text analysis systems are insufficient to effectively capture text-based content in CMC (Sack 2000). Paccagnella suggested that computer programs to support CMC text analysis would be helpful, yet do not exist. He noted numerous ways in which automated systems could benefit CMC text analysis, including data linking, content analysis, data display, and graphic mapping. Without appropriate CMC text analysis systems, text features are often overlooked (Panteli 2002). There has been limited analysis of CMC text since manual methods are time consuming (Hara et al. 2000). Cothrel (2000) stated that discussion content is an essential dimension of online community success measurement, yet proper definition and measurement remains elusive.
A Design Framework for CMC Text Analysis
Given the need for CMC text analysis and a lack of systems that address this need, an important and obvious question arises. Why do most CMC systems support structural features but neglect text content features? There are three major differences that are likely responsible for the disparity between the numbers of systems representing these feature types, including feature definitions, extraction, and presentation. Structural features are well defined, easy to extract, and easy to visualize. Appropriate activity (Fiore and Smith 2002) and interaction based features have been established in the sociology literature. These features are also easy to extract and visualize using bar chart variants for activity frequency (Viegas and Smith 2004; Xiong and Donath 1999) and networks for interaction (Donath et al. 1999; Smith and Fiore 2001). In contrast text features are loosely defined, difficult to extract, and harder to present to end users. The richness of CMC text necessitates a complex set of text features (Donath et al. 1999). For example, over 1,000 text features have been used for analyzing style, with no consensus (Rudman 1997). Additionally, text feature extraction can be challenging due to high noise levels in CMC text (Nasukawa and Nagano 2001). Finally, the informational richness of text requires multiple complementary presentation views (Keim 2002; Losiewicz et al. 2000). Different techniques have been developed to support various facets of text visualization with no ideal solution (Huang et al. 2005; Miller et al. 1998; Wise 1999).
In light of these challenges, Sack (2000) argues for a new CMC system design philosophy that incorporates automatic text analysis techniques. He states it is necessary to formulate a complementary design philosophy for CMC systems in which the point is to help participants and observers spot emerging groups and changing patterns of communication (p. 86).
Design guidelines are needed due to the lack of previous tools supporting in depth CMC text analysis, the complexity associated with properly representing CMC text, and the lack of consensus regarding appropriate text features and presentation formats.
According to the design science paradigm, design is a product and a process (Hevner et al. 2004; Walls et al. 1992). Development of a design framework for CMC text analysis systems requires consideration of the design product and design process. The design product is the set of requirements and necessary design characteristics that should guide IT artifact construction. An IT artifact can be a construct, method, model, or instantiation (Hevner et al. 2004). The design process is composed of the steps and procedures taken to develop the artifact.
Information systems development typically follows an iterative design process of building and evaluating (March and Smith 1995), which is analogous to the generate/test cycle proposed by Simon (1996). Such an approach is particularly important in design situations involving complex or vaguely defined user requirements (Markus et al. 2002). We believe that the ambiguities associated with CMC text analysis also warrant the use of an iterative design process. Hence, we focus on the design product. Walls et al. (1992) presented a model for the formulation of information systems design theories (ISDTs). Their model incorporates four components guiding the design product aspect of an ISDT. These include the kernel theories, meta-requirements, meta-design, and testable hypotheses (shown in Table 2). The kernel theories govern meta-requirements for the design product. The metadesign is anticipated to fulfill these meta-requirements by providing detailed specifications for the class of IT artifacts addressed by the design product. Testable hypotheses are used to evaluate how well the meta-design satisfies meta-requirements. A good example of an ISDT design product is the relational database (Walls et al. 1992). Using relational database theory as a kernel theory, meta-requirements are the elimination of insertion, update, and deletion anomalies. The meta-design consists of a set of tables in at least third normal form. The testable hypotheses are theorems and proofs validating the normalized database tables as being devoid of any anomalies.
Using Walls et al.’s model, we propose a design framework for CMC text analysis systems (shown in Table 3). Employ-

Table 2. Components of an ISDT Design Product (Adapted from Walls et al. 1992)

1. Kernel theories

Theories from natural or social sciences governing design requirements

2. Meta-requirements

Describes a class of goals to which theory applies

3. Meta-design

Describes a class of artifacts hypothesized to meet meta-requirements

4. Testable hypotheses

Used to test whether meta-design satisfies meta-requirements

Table 3. Components of the Proposed Design Framework for CMC Text Analysis Systems

1. Kernel theory

Systemic functional linguistic theory (SFLT)

2. Meta-requirements

Support for various information types found in CMC text that represent the ideational, textual, and interpersonal meta-functions.

3. Meta-design

The incorporation of a rich set of text features coupled with appropriate feature selection and visualization methods; collectively capable of representing the ideational, textual, and interpersonal meta-functions. Specific meta-design elements are as follows: • Utilization of extended feature set comprised of language and processing resources. • Use of ranking and projection based feature selection techniques. • Inclusion of multidimensional, text overlay, and interaction visualization methods.

4. Testable hypotheses Empirical evaluation of the features and selection/visualization techniques’ ability to accurately represent information types associated with the three meta-functions. Specific testable hypotheses are as follows: • Ability of the features, feature selection, and visualization methods to characterize information types associated with the three meta-functions. • Ability of the features, feature selection, and visualization methods to discriminate information types associated with the three meta-functions. ing systemic functional linguistic theory as our kernel theory, we propose meta-requirements and a meta-design necessary to support CMC text analysis. We also present hypotheses intended to evaluate how well the meta-design satisfies our meta-requirements. The ensuing sections elaborate on the components of our design framework.
Kernel Theory
Perhaps the most important characteristic of CMC is the language complexities it introduces as compared to other forms of text (Wilson and Peterson 2002). Effective analysis of CMC text entails the utilization of a language theory that can provide representational guidelines. Grounded in functional linguistics, systemic functional linguistic theory (SFLT) provides an appropriate mechanism for representing CMC text information (Halliday 2004). SFLT states that language has three meta-functions: ideational, interpersonal, and textual. The three meta-functions are intended to provide a comprehensive functional representation of language meaning by encompassing the physical, mental, and social elements of language (Fairclough 2003).
The ideational meta-function states that language consists of ideas. According to Halliday (2004), the ideational metafunction of language suggests that a message is “about something” or “construing experience” (p. 30). It pertains to the use of “language as reflection” (p. 29). The ideational metafunction relates to aspects of the “mental world” which include attitudes, desires, and values (Fairclough 2003; Halliday 2004).
The textual meta-function indicates that language has organization, structure, flow, cohesion, and continuity (Halliday 2004). It relates to aspects of the “physical world” pertaining to the manner in which ideas are communicated (Fairclough 2003; Halliday 2004). The textual meta-function therefore serves as a facilitating function enabling the conveyance of the ideational and interpersonal meta-functions. It can be present via information types such as style, genres, and vernaculars (Argamon et al. 2007). For instance, an author biography and vita may convey similar ideational meaning about one’s educational background and career accomplishments using contrasting textual functions, in this case due to genre differences.
The interpersonal meta-function refers to the fact that language is a medium of exchange between people (Sack 2000). It pertains to the use of “language as action” (Halliday 2004, p. 30). The interpersonal meta-function is concerned with the enactment of social relations; it relates to aspects of the “social world” (Fairclough 2003; Halliday 2004). It is generally represented using CMC interaction information.
Meta-Requirements
Analysis of CMC text requires the inclusion of all three language meta-functions described by SFLT: ideational, textual, and interpersonal. “Any summary of a very large scale conversation is incomplete if it does not incorporate all three of these meta-functions (ideational, interpersonal, and textual)” (Sack 2000, p. 75). Therefore, effective depiction of CMC text entails consideration of information types capable of representing these three meta-functions.
The ideational meta-function in CMC text can be manifested in the form of various information types, including topics, events, opinions, and emotions. Topics are the most commonly represented information type in text (Mladenic 1999; Tan 1999). Events are specific incidents with a temporal dimension. While “hurricane” is a topic, “Hurricane Katrina” is an event. Event detection has garnered significant attention in recent years, although it continues to present challenges since effective representation of events in text remains elusive (Allan et al. 1998). Additional information types representing the ideational meta-function include opinions and emotions. Opinions include sentiment polarities (e.g., positive, neutral, negative) and intensities (e.g., high or low) about a particular target (Pang et al. 2002). Popular applications of opinionrelated information include mining online movie and product reviews for consumer preference information (Turney and Littman 2003). CMC text is also rich in emotional information (Picard 1997). Emotions encompassed in online communication consist of various affects such as happiness, sadness, horror, and anger (Subasic and Huettner 2001).
Styles, genres, and vernaculars are information types representing the textual meta-function. Style is based on the literary choices an author makes, which can be a reflection of context (who, what, when, why, where) and personal background (education, gender, etc.). Example styles are formal (use of greetings, structured sentences, paragraphs) and informal (no sentences, no greetings, erratic punctuation, use of slang). Stylistic information is utilized in numerous forms of analysis. Authorship analysis identifies and characterizes individuals based on their writing style (Zheng et al. 2006). Deception detection attempts to determine if an individual’s writing is deceitful (Zhou et al. 2004), while power cue identification explores the writing style differences between superiors and subordinates in organizational settings (Panteli 2002). Genres are classes of writing. Genres found in CMC include inquiries, informational messages, memos, reports, interview transcripts, and feedback comments (Santini 2004; Yates and Orlikowski 2002).
The interpersonal meta-function is generally represented by CMC interaction information (i.e., who is communicating with whom). Interaction information can be derived from message headers for certain CMC modes such as e-mail and blogs. In e-mail, the “RE:” in the message subject coupled with the presence of quoted content are salient interaction cues. However other CMC modes (e.g., chat rooms, instant messaging, web forums) require the use of text interaction cues inherent in the body text. Text-based interaction cues include direct references to fellow users’ names, references to previously posted content, and conjunction and ellipsis based cues indicating continuation of an existing conversation between users (Fu et al. 2008; Sack 2000). Interaction information is useful for social network analysis and evaluation of conversation streams based on communication thread patterns (Smith and Fiore 2001).
The three meta-functions and their associated information types are interrelated and should not be considered in isolation from one another. For instance, an analyst may be concerned with opinions regarding a particular topic, or the stylistic tendencies for two interacting participants’ text. Table 4 shows examples for information types that represent the three meta-functions, and their related analysis applications. The following section presents a meta-design for how the three meta-functions can be supported by accurately representing their corresponding information types.
Meta-Design
While meta-requirements are derived from the kernel theories, the objective of the meta-design is to introduce a class of artifacts hypothesized to meet the meta-requirements (Walls et al. 1992). Three critical elements of any text mining, text analysis, or information retrieval system are their features,

Table 4. Various Information Types for the Three Meta-Functions

Meta-Function

Info. Types

Analysis Types

